---
layout: post
title: Why Distributed Version Control?
date: 2010-10-19 00:01
author: ventspace
comments: true
categories: [Non-technical]
---
It's the obvious question, but finding a coherent explanation is difficult. Why are we even interested in distributed version control? What is the point, and what changed in the past five years that turned Subversion from the gem of our industry to an evil of it? Sure you could watch Torvalds' Git talk, but his view of the development world is not a common one by any stretch.

I said earlier that it was Joel Spolsky's <a href="http://hginit.com/00.html">Subversion Re-education</a> that led me to become interested in alternatives to Subversion. It helped dispel some misconceptions and give a real world perspective on the advantages. But it's still somewhat haphazard. To have this discussion properly requires that we revisit why we use source control at all.

Fundamentally, what a version control system does for us is in two parts. Number one, it allows a team of developers to collaborate smoothly on a single codebase. Number two, it keeps track of all the changes that are made to that codebase, for all eternity. It's these two simple but powerful principles that define all of these systems and make most modern software possible. Yet we're always having trouble with them.

I'll actually start with the latter point. A VCS is supposed to track all of the changes ever made to the code. That's not quite true, actually -- they only track what we tell them to track by virtue of a "commit" button. Our first problem, then, is when to hit that button. I had a conversation with someone who said he commits when his code 'works'. 
