---
layout: post
title: Variance Shadow Maps
date: 2010-08-15 18:47
author: ventspace
comments: true
categories: [Non-technical]
---
I know I'm very late to the party on this one, but to be honest I took a very long break from graphics programming and I'm just now getting caught up with a lot of things. For our next demo of the BioReplicant technology I've been putting together a halfway decent rendering engine. As part of that effort, I've just finished implementing <a href="http://download.nvidia.com/developer/presentations/2006/gdc/2006-GDC-Variance-Shadow-Maps.ppt">variance shadow maps</a>, which is frankly a brilliant algorithm.

I kind of regret blowing off statistics in school, because this is based entirely off a fairly simple probability concept that I'm having some trouble wrapping my head around. The basic idea behind shadow maps is that each pixel in the shadow map tells us whether a certain world space position is shadowed or not. VSM makes a very simple modification; the shadow map now represents a distribution of probabilities about whether a certain world space location is shadowed. By storing a squared value along with the depth, you can compute variance at any point.

The amazing thing about this change is that it immediately solves almost <i>every</i> problem related to shadow maps. The shadow map becomes eligible for every type of hardware filtering, including anisotropic and MSAA. Depth aliasing simply disappears. A simple gaussian blur on the map creates beautifully smooth soft shadows. It's totally orthogonal to techniques that reshape the shadow map projection to improve precision.
