---
layout: post
title: Debugging the Blackness
date: 2010-10-04 15:29
author: ventspace
comments: true
categories: [Graphics]
---
Any time I'm doing graphics programming, there is one infuriating problem I nearly always run into -- the dreaded black screen of blackness. I'm pretty sure it's a very common problem to have, because a lot of things (or lack thereof) can result in a totally blank screen. Over the years, I've come up with an array of debugging techniques to try and narrow down the 'cause' of blank-screen.
<ul>
	<li>Don't clear your back buffer to black, or white, or any single channel color. These colors tend to be outputted often as the result of other mistakes.</li>
	<li>Double check basic render states. If using fixed function, disable all lighting and maybe even texturing. Set your shaders to output solid colors. Disable back face culling.</li>
	<li>Verify that your geometry vertices are where you think they are. Draw your geometry in point mode, with point size cranked way up.</li>
	<li>Verify that your indices are generating polys correctly, by checking how the mesh looks like in wireframe. Stray lines are not usually a good sign.</li>
	<li>Sanity check your camera settings, and hard code them if necessary. Maybe just spin the camera and see if anything shows up.</li>
	<li>If you're doing more complex rendering, eg deferred shading, dump your intermediate buffers to file on a keypress. (D3D users can get a spiced up version of this via PIX.)</li>
	<li></li>
</ul>


