---
layout: post
title: Then There's Mac OSX
date: 2011-01-31 16:34
author: ventspace
comments: true
categories: [Software Engineering]
---
Pop quiz: what's the best thing about Mac OSX?
Answer: Most people still don't expect you to use it.

Macs have become increasingly popular over the years, driven by any number of forces. Since my day job has now become heavily iOS focused, I've spent a lot of time with the system, although I'm plenty familiar with its predecessors. I was first exposed to 10.2 Jaguar, then 10.3 Panther. I missed a few in between, and now use Snow Leopard daily. There's been a lot of cool and/or needed improvements in that time frame, and the explosion of iPhones has carried Mac into the spotlight more than ever. There's just one, serious fact I can't get away from.

<strong>Mac OSX sucks.</strong>

Oh sure, there are bright spots -- the glorious installation mechanism, the sleek Dashboard and Expose implementations, etc. But when you get right down to it, I'd pick Windows over it any day. Hell, I'd probably pick Linux first. Using OSX regularly is an exercise in frustration, irritation, and a certain sense of wonder at the Apple cult's ability to give such a junker product such a good reputation.

<strong>Reliability.</strong> Macs are supposed to be more stable. I will concede that a Windows machine is much easier to abuse, malware-ify, etc. But my MacBook Pro crashes about as often as any of my Windows machines, which is about once every couple months. (Linux users will laugh, but most of them spend more time tuning 'uptime' than doing actual work.) OSX also has a habit of coming up with creatively frozen blank blue screens, beachballs, and the like. Windows can take <em>freaking forever</em> with some tasks like updates, but the last time I had a serious failure was a bad memory stick. 

<strong>The Dock.</strong> I would not be the first or the last to talk about the Dock, though as a practical matter the task listing approach in Windows 7 is pretty much the same. The Dock used to be worthless garbage in Ye Olde OSX, but since the addition of the Applications folder is actually sort of fine. Sort of, because my only sizing options are inch square monster icons or a rather compact list. Some kind of iOS envy? The icons are dramatically bigger than the iPod/iPad, and a mouse is rather more precise than fingers. I get it, your icons are high resolution and icons the size of small yachts appeal to the elderly, the stupid, the blind, and journalists. How about a middle option for everyone else? (It's not like the Dock is continuously variably sized! Oh wait.) And then there's the fact that, entirely unlike the Windows 7 start menu, it's not corner activated. Wonderful.

<strong>That stupid "maximize" button.</strong> The usual explanation for this insane control is that the it asks the application to choose the right size for its content. The reality is that this is slang for "let the application do whatever it wants", and one of Mac's biggest strengths was NOT letting applications do what they want. The green resize button in OSX is some kind of carnival jack in the box. Something will happen, and it will probably be dramatic. It will be unexpected and it will be almost, but not quite, entirely different from what you actually wanted.

<strong>The menu bar.</strong> It turns out there are some fairly strong justifications for the menu bar being the way it is. Somehow those justifications were never mentioned to the people who made the Dock. More to the depressing point is that, apparently no one with a functioning brain and multiple monitors was put in charge of designing the menu bar. Funny coming from the OS for music and art types, for whom dual monitors are a professional necessity. The menu bar lives ONLY on the primary monitor, which is really useful if you weren't planning on actually using the other monitor(s) for anything. If you do happen to use them, you'll now notice that the menu bar and common functions have become a disturbingly long mouse trip from the application you are using. Not only that, but spanned windows across identical resolution monitors can't fill the second monitor because of the menu bar. I am running an application called SecondBar that simply clones the active menu bar to all screens. Now I don't have to cross two thousand pixels to get to my XCode menu while using XCode.

<strong>Window management.</strong> You know what's fun on a Mac? Compare two documents side by side. Maybe they're different versions or something. I'll wait. It turns out that comparing documents is a fairly common task when using a computer, especially since it's apparently the only productive use for widescreen monitors other than video (and maybe audio authoring). Microsoft figured this out, eventually, and added a handy snap-to-half control. OSX allows you to simply haphazardly size and place them yourself, and in an added act of spite only leaves one active corner for resizing windows. It's awkward with a mouse and worse with a trackpad. At the end of the day you're better off on either OS with a custom window-grid utility, of which there are many available.

<strong>Font rendering.</strong> Another topic on which so much has been said, especially when you run into one of the poor saps who doesn't like MS ClearType for whatever reason. In Apple's defense, I don't notice how shitty the fonts are until I put it next to a Windows machine running similar settings. That was a hilariously self inflicted wound in the first release of Safari for Windows, when Apple actually laid their font rendering down on the Windows platform for some reason, making it immediately obvious that monitors are not paper and trying to render fonts on that assumption is a bad idea. To put a particularly fine point on it, change XCode's font to Courier New. Under size 12 or so, the text actually starts to turn grey.

<strong>Security.</strong> Is actually decent (but not stand-out) if you're not using Safari. Otherwise, good luck.


