---
layout: post
title: Speculating About Xbox Next
date: 2012-03-12 11:50
author: ventspace
comments: true
categories: [Non-technical]
---
I just got back from GDC, and one of the fun things about GDC is that it's a place where NDAs go to die. I've been hearing a lot of rumors, though the credibility of any given information is always somewhat suspect. I have some supposed info about the specs on the next Xbox, but I'm not drawing on any of that info here. I'm dubious about at least some of the things I heard, and it's not good to spill that kind of info if you're trying to maintain a vaguely positive relationship with a company anyway. So what I'm presenting here is strictly speculation based on extrapolation of what we've seen in the past and overall industry and Microsoft trends.

<ul>
	<li><b>8 GB shared memory.</b> The original Xbox had 64 MB of shared memory. The Xbox 360 has 512, a jump of 8x. This generation is dragging along a little longer, and memory prices have dropped violently in the last year or so. I would like to see 16 GB actually, but the consoles always screw us on memory and I just don't think we'll be that lucky. 4 GB is clearly too low, they'd be insane to ship a console with that now. As for the memory type, we're probably talking simple GDDR3 shared modules. The Xboxes have always been shared memory and there's no reason for them to change that now. Expect some weird addressing limitations on the GPU side.</li>
	<li><b>Windows 8 kernel.</b> All indications are that the WinCE embedded kernel is being retired over the next two years (at least for internal use). There's a substantial tech investment in Windows 8, and I think we're going to see the desktop kernel roll out across all <i>three</i> screens. (HINT HINT.) iOS and Android are both running stripped desktop kernels, and the resources in current mobile platforms make WinXP's <a href="http://support.microsoft.com/kb/314865">minimum hardware requirements</a> look comically low. There is no reason to carry the embedded kernel along any longer. Keep your ears up if you're a CE licensee, though.</li>
	<li><b>x86-64, 8x2 way CPU. </b>
