---
layout: post
title: Digital Color Part 2
date: 2015-03-04 15:37
author: ventspace
comments: true
categories: [Graphics, Photography]
---
In <a href="http://ventspace.wordpress.com/2012/06/04/digital-color-part-1/">Part 1</a> of this series, I talked about the basics of digital color representation and manipulation. There's a notable omission in that discussion: it strictly covers hue/saturation/chroma, leaving <i>luminance</i> out of the picture entirely. The reason is that luminance is a complex topic and merits its own dedicated discussion. At the end of this part, we'll have a full idea of the software concepts required to handle all types of imaging correctly. Part 3 will then visit the hardware side in more detail.

Note that I gloss over some geometric concepts here, leaving the explanations to Wikipedia.
<h1>Physical Quantities of Light</h1>
Once again we'll start with a discussion of how things operate in the real world. I recommend going through this section carefully, as this gets confusing very quickly. All of the quantities we're about to talk about are based on <em>luma</em>. That means they are weighted by human sensitivity to light frequencies. Thus a powerful X-ray beam will have a total value of zero for all of these numbers.

First up is the basic SI unit for measurements of light, the lumen (lm). Lumens are used to measure <em>luminous flux</em>, also sometimes called <em>luminous power</em>. I will use "power" as that makes it clear that a lumen is a measurement of energy output over time. The typical light output power of a 100W incandescent light bulb is 1700 lumens. The total light output of the sun is 3.75×10<sup>28</sup> lumens. "Photons per second" is a reasonable way to think of lumens.

The candela (cd) is a measure of <em>luminous intensity</em> emitted in a particular direction, expressed in terms of <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid_angle">solid angle</a> as lumens/steradian or lm/sr. The unit is a standardized version of the light intensity from a candle. This is our core measurement of how bright a light source is. A sphere covers a solid angle of 4π steradians. If we assume that a 100W light bulb emits a perfect spherical pattern, that gives us an intensity of 1700 / 4π = 135.28 cd. If we blocked half the light's output with a shade, the brightness would still be 135.28 cd, as it's now 850 lumens over a hemisphere. If we used a hemispherical mirror instead, it'd effectively be 1700 lumens over half a sphere, giving us 270.56 cd.

<em>Luminance</em> is a standard measure of light intensity over area, measured in SI units of candela per square meter (cd/m<sup>2</sup>) or <i>nits</i>. The easiest way to understand this is to consider a large flat light source, for example the monitor you're currently looking at (unless you've printed this article). Monitors are traditionally calibrated to 200 cd/m<sup>2</sup> in normally lit office environments. That means that if your monitor has an area of 1 square meter, it functions as a 200 cd light. That would be about the size of a 60 inch TV. Direct sunlight has a luminance of 1.9x10<sup>9</sup> cd/m<sup>2</sup>; moonlight has an intensity of 2.5x10<sup>3</sup> cd/m<sup>2</sup>. Note that those are the intensities of light created BY the moon and the sun; it's not the intensity of the actual object in the sky.

Lastly we have <i>illuminance</i>, measured in lumens per meter squared (lm/m<sup>2</sup>). The SI term for that unit is <em>lux</em>. Illuminance is a measure of incident light power. That is, it tells us how many lumens are hitting a square meter of a receiving surface. Photographers often measure illuminance using an <a href="http://www.bhphotovideo.com/find/Product_Resources/lightmeters1.jsp">incident light meter</a>. A bright midday sun generates about 98,000 lux of illumination at sea level. The full moon, on the other hand, produces about 0.2 lux in most places. Typical office lighting is in the range of 250-500 lux, and an overcast day is about 1000 lux.

Distinguishing between luminance and illuminance is important. Luminance is light emerging from a light source. It's spreading out from that source, which causes the units to have an angular term (remember, luminance is cd/m<sup>2</sup> and cd is lm/sr). Illuminance is a measure of how an object is illuminated, meaning light that is arriving on its surface from somewhere. What happens to that light doesn't matter; the receiver can be a perfect mirror reflecting all of the incident light, or a perfect black object absorbing all incident light. The illuminance remains the same regardless. Similarly, a PC monitor in a dark room has luminance but no illuminance. Illuminance is strictly about power (lumens) arriving over a surface area.
<h1>Human Perception of Light</h1>
So far we've just dealt with the mathematical quantities used to measure and express light values. Although these luma quantities are weighted to the human color spectrum, we still need to deal with how we actually perceive light intensity.

Our perception of brightness is a combination of data received from both rod and cone cells in the eyes. Cones are responsible for color vision, but only function in relatively bright light. Rods are monochrome but dramatically more sensitive to light. Our night and peripheral vision is derived from the rods. All of these cells are able to adjust their sensitivity to light over time. Because our vision behaves as a video feed, our brains are able to combine a lot of information over time (like color, in many cases) and seamlessly integrate these derived values back into our perception.

The eye also controls incoming light through the dilation and contraction of the iris. This mechanism is also used in cameras to adjust the amount of light entering, and is referred to as the iris or aperture in that case. A wide iris allows a lot of light in, but also reduces the distance range where those rays are all in focus. A narrow iris reduces the light but causes a wider distance range of rays to arrive in focus. This effect is called <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth_of_field">depth of field</a> and forms an important creative aspect of photography. However it's important to note that the effect is <em>not</em> unique to mechanical cameras. Our eyes are constantly adjusting focus, and our brain effectively filters out the defocused areas. It is possible, with some cross eyed acrobatics, to observe your own out of focus areas.

At any given instant in time, the human eye is able to perceive a luminance range where the brightest distinct luminance value is about one hundred times as intense as the lowest distinct value. This is our <em>static contrast ratio</em>. Through the total range of adjustments that a healthy eye can make, the ratio is about one million to one. This is referred to as <em>dynamic contrast ratio</em>. Light, like sound, is not perceived linearly but logarithmically. This allows us to process the massive range of luminance that occurs in every day life. A doubling or halving of intensity is referred to as a stop in photography. As a point of reference, common sunglasses block about 75% of incident light, which represents a darkening of two stops (one quarter of the light remains). The human static contrast ratio of 100:1 is log2(100) or 6.64 stops; our dynamic contrast ratio is 19.93 stops.

There is one more quirk of human vision that is very important. Although the numbers above give us the ratios between minimum and maximum perceivable brightness, they don't tell us how the gradations are perceived. It turns out that our vision is biased towards distinguishing between darker shades better than lighter ones. This bias follows a power or gamma curve, which I will discuss in more detail later.
